Title: about me
Tags: about
Slug: about
Template: work
Alias: /output/pages/about.html
Alias: /pages/work.html
Author: David Lukeš

# Contact

David Lukeš, ![e-mail]({filename}/images/dvl.png "Contact me at:")

# Personal

I'm a phonetician/linguist with side interests in statistics, programming and
NLP. In fact, I'm terminally curious about computer-related stuff in general,
which has led me down more rabbit holes than I'd care to count. I hail from
Prague, Czech Republic, a precious little gem of a city, but I've also lived in
France and Belgium for a while when I was a kid.

I play badminton and football (of the soccer persuasion) and enjoy reading
American Jewish literature, as well as watching (in no particular order) Monty
Python, Bill Bailey, Jon Stewart, Ricky Gervais, Stephen Fry and other assorted
smart and funny people who, along with Frank Zappa and The Beatles, are
collectively responsible for my lifelong crush on the English language. I used
to play the saxophone reasonably well, but nowadays mostly enjoy playing the
guitar atrociously bad and singing along.

# Academic and professional credentials

## Current position

I'm a junior researcher at the [Institute of the Czech National
Corpus](http://korpus.cz), [Faculty of Arts](http://ff.cuni.cz), [Charles
University (Prague)](http://cuni.cz). My duties/interests include:

- coordinating phonetic transcription for the ORTOFON corpus project
- data processing and functionality prototyping (mainly using Python and R)
- research into the scope of language variability in Czech using
  multi-dimensional analysis

For further details and older history, see [my
CV](https://trnka.korpus.cz/~lukes/files/david_lukes_cv.pdf) (updated spring
2017).

## Code

When coding, I feel most comfortable in Python, and I love spending time with
[Rust](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/second-edition/index.html) (though I'm
nowhere near as proficient, and occasionally lost and frustrated). I find R
useful (though convoluted on occasion), write JavaScript when forced to and
avoid Perl as much as I can. I know my way around the Unix command line and
enjoy using it. And even after years of casual acquaintance, I'm still not
really sure how I feel about Lisp, though I'll take Emacs Lisp over Vimscript
any day.

Feel free to check out [my <span class="fa fa-github-alt"></span> GitHub
profile](https://github.com/dlukes).

## MA thesis

If you're interested in the affinities between people's abilities to process
language and music, my MA thesis was about [Perceptual sensitivity to music and
speech stimuli in the frequency and temporal
domains](http://hdl.handle.net/20.500.11956/68500) and I'm moderately proud of
it. Unfortunately, it's in Czech (with an English abstract).

Here's a quick summary: I was curious to know whether having a good musical ear
correlates with having a good "speech perception ear" (spoiler alert: it does),
so I put together a listening test (using
[Praat](http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat/)) in which I made participants listen
to short utterances and melodies to see how well they could detect
manipulations in pitch and timing.

There's also a [companion repository](https://github.com/dlukes/diplomka) on
GitHub which contains the listening test (so that anyone can run it in Praat)
and raw results as they were collected (for reproducibility).

## BA thesis

Way back when, my academic interests lay in literary theory, so I wrote a [BA
thesis on Philip Roth](http://hdl.handle.net/20.500.11956/50667). I still like
Philip Roth very much, but I mostly tend to steer away from literary theory
nowadays because I realized I'd rather be wrapping my head around logically
*coherent* complex abstract notions.
